---
layout: post
title: The Perimeter of the Ellipse
date: 2015-10-20 11:12:00-0400
description: A deep dive into the Arithmetic Geometric Mean and its application in calculating the ellipse's perimeter
tags: math
categories: tech
related_posts: false
---

The Arithmetic Geometric Mean (AGM) is not just a fascinating mathematical concept; it also has practical applications in various fields, including geometry. In this post, we'll explore how AGM helps in finding the length of the perimeter of an ellipse.

To start, let's understand what AGM is. Given two non-negative numbers, $$a$$ and $$b$$, their AGM is obtained by iteratively computing their arithmetic and geometric means to form a sequence that converges to a single number - the AGM. Mathematically, it is represented as:

$$
\text{AGM}(a, b) = \lim_{n \to \infty} a_n = \lim_{n \to \infty} b_n
$$

where $$ a_{n+1} = \frac{a_n + b_n}{2} $$ and $$ b_{n+1} = \sqrt{a_n b_n}$$, with $$ a_0 = a$$ and $$ b_0 = b$$.

Now, let's connect this to the perimeter of an ellipse. An ellipse with semi-major axis a and semi-minor axis b has an approximate perimeter given by the formula:

$$
P \approx \pi [3(a + b) - \sqrt{(3a + b)(a + 3b)}]
$$

However, this approximation isn't exact. To find the exact perimeter, we use elliptic integrals, which can be simplified using AGM. The exact formula of the perimeter \( P \) of an ellipse can be represented by an integral in terms of the semi-major axis \( a \) and semi-minor axis \( b \). This integral, which is a form of elliptic integral, is quite complex:

$$
P = 4a \int_0^{\frac{\pi}{2}} \sqrt{1 - e^2 \sin^2 \theta} \, d\theta
$$

where \( e \) is the eccentricity of the ellipse, defined as \( e = \sqrt{1 - \frac{b^2}{a^2}} \), and \( \theta \) is the angle parameter.

This integral, however, is not straightforward to solve. But with the help of AGM, we can express this elliptic integral in a more manageable form. The exact perimeter is given by:

$$
P = 4a \cdot \text{AGM}(1, \sqrt{1 - e^2})
$$

The **angular average** of the distance between the perimeter of an ellipse and its centre also invokes the concept of AGM:

$$
  \langle r \rangle_{\theta} 
  = \frac{1}{2\pi} \int_{0}^{2\pi} r \, d\theta \\
  = \frac{1}{2\pi}
  \int_{0}^{2\pi} \frac{a b}{\sqrt{a^2\sin^2 \theta+b^2\cos^2 \theta}} \, d\theta \\
  = \frac{2ab}{\pi}
  \int_{0}^{\pi/2} \frac{d\theta}{\sqrt{a^2\sin^2 \theta+b^2\cos^2 \theta}}
$$

which is nothing but $$\frac{ab}{\operatorname{agm}(a,b)}$$.